---
title: Unbuilt Software
date: "2030-01-01"
tags:
  - tech
  - meta
---

There are three types of software systems at any company runs. First, the high value software systems. These systems or services compose the key building blocks for the company. They are the services that set the standard for what other software in the company will comply with. Meaning their requirements for security,  performance or quality set the standard other software at the organization is expected to meet.Since they are the highest value they dictate what language and frameworks will be used, what architectural and hosting patterns are used by engineers in the company.

The second type of software system is a software system that is necessary but not sufficient sufficient for the company to exist these are systems that will use the frameworks the languages the testing processes the release methodology the security frameworks that the first type of systems use. These systems are important for the company but do not drive the same disproportionate value to return hence why they are not worth the investment to create new systems and new deployment 

Third companies have other systems that may be necessary for the company to exist if the company was to be formed de novo they might not even be internal to the company but that at this point do not warrant the investment to migrate to some other provider this is the classic we have been running exchange on cram for years at what point do we transition to Microsoft teams in the cloud. These systems are usually one off ancillary systems handled by a particular department that has a rollup of functionality underneath them this is often the domain of a IT operations 

You can fail at the first type of system but not truly understanding the constraints with which you are operating in these systems might have very high levels of requirement for performance say if the engineers do not understand the mechanisms and are not schooled in the particular technologies or optimization required to meet those objectives this can be come excess an accidental threat to the company One notable example in the common mind is Friendster and their inability to scale their social network performance and example in the common mind where the company was able to scale is YouTube there are many stories online of the continuous performance bottlenecks the company was hitting as users were deluge in their system with videos and views.

You can fill up the second type of system by overly constraining their ability to be improved if the security and build processes needed in the first type of systems constrain the second type of system such that they do not and are not upgraded and improved at the pace that they are needed to keep pace with the industry there is an opportunity for other competitors to enter the market with improved efficiencies around the second types of systems which lowers their overall cost basis this can then become an existential threat to the company 

A way to fail with a third type of system is to not understand the song cost fallacy fallacy. These systems are necessary but any additional investment is throwing good money after bad if they are so critical that they must remain up then it is necessary for them to be moved either into the category of the first type of system or to be completely outsourced. It’s much better to take three days or a week of downtime at your convenience and I don’t known time a post to have the system failed completely when you were unprepared and most likely at the most critical time for your business. Any effort or any investment of time and money should be focused on migrating or eliminating the systems all together. It is much better to have a system with a company whose business it is to provide that service such that that system is in that companies system one delineation versus to have this in an afterthought or red headed step child category as it is with yours. 

What does analysis leaves out is the types of systems that are de novo or speculative. When building software often times when does not know the full value of the system that you are beginning to prototype invention and innovation are created through experimentation and software. If the constraints of the system one processes and deployment patterns are such that they eliminate the even the ability for engineers to experiment the company is foregoing innovation they are foregoing novelty. If software value is distributed as a power curve then one of the most critical aspects is the number of samples that you take from that value distribution it would imply that it is most important to increase the number of potential opportunities to have a runaway success. If the only way to experiment is to pay the tax of complying with system one processes your sentencing your organization to a decreased amount of innovation 

